BUILD.md, before:

# Building Standalone Executables

This guide explains how to build standalone executables of Witchy CLI that don't require Node.js to be installed.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ installed (for building only, not for running the executable)
- All dependencies installed (`npm install`)

## Pre-populated Database

Starting with v1.0.6, Witchy CLI includes a pre-populated database with the executable. Before building:

```bash
# Generate the pre-populated database
npm run db:prepopulate

# Verify the database
npm run db:verify
```

This creates `assets/witchy.db` which is bundled with the executable.

## Building for Your Platform

To build an executable for your current platform:

```bash
npm run build
```

This creates an executable in the `dist/` folder:

- **Windows**: `dist/witchy-cli.exe`
- **macOS**: `dist/witchy-cli`
- **Linux**: `dist/witchy-cli`

## Building for All Platforms

To build executables for Windows, macOS, and Linux at once:

```bash
npm run build:all
```

This creates:

- `dist/witchy-cli-win.exe` - Windows executable
- `dist/witchy-cli-macos` - macOS executable
- `dist/witchy-cli-linux` - Linux executable

## Running the Executable

Once built, users can run the executable without Node.js:

**Windows:**

```cmd
witchy-cli.exe herb rosemary
```

**macOS/Linux:**

```bash
chmod +x witchy-cli  # Make executable (first time only)
./witchy-cli herb rosemary
```

## File Size

The executables are approximately 40-50MB each because they include:

- Node.js runtime
- All dependencies (sqlite3, etc.)
- All source code and data files

## Distribution

### Method 1: GitHub Releases (Automated)

When you push a version tag, GitHub Actions automatically builds and publishes executables:

```bash
git tag v1.0.0
git push origin v1.0.0
```

Users can then download from the [Releases page](https://github.com/the-amber-joy/witchy-cli/releases).

### Method 2: Manual Distribution

Simply share the built executable file. Users can:

1. Download the file
2. Run it directly (no installation needed)

## Troubleshooting

### "Cannot find module" errors

Make sure all required files are in the `pkg.assets` section of `package.json`.

### Database issues

The executable includes a pre-populated database. On first run, this database is copied to the user's data directory:

- Windows: `%APPDATA%\WitchyCLI\witchy.db`
- macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/WitchyCLI/witchy.db`
- Linux: `~/.local/share/witchy-cli/witchy.db`

If searches aren't working, check if the database was copied correctly.

### macOS "unverified developer" warning

Users may need to right-click → Open the first time, or run:

```bash
xattr -cr witchy-cli
```

### Linux permissions

Make the file executable:

```bash
chmod +x witchy-cli
```

## Technical Details

We use [pkg](https://github.com/vercel/pkg) to bundle Node.js and the application into a single executable. The `pkg` configuration in `package.json` specifies:

- Target platforms and Node.js version
- Assets to include (JSON data, source files)
- Scripts to bundle

The executable includes everything needed to run, making distribution simple for end users.

Commit message:

fix: Add macOS DMG installer to prevent garbled text issue
- Created DMG installer script for better macOS user experience
- Added comprehensive macOS installation documentation
- Updated build workflow to automatically create DMG on releases
- Added release template and issue template for macOS support
- Updated README with clear warnings about binary vs DMG

Mac users were seeing garbled text because they were opening the
binary executable in a text editor. Now they have a proper DMG
installer option that provides a more familiar installation experience.

Fixes: macOS "garbled mess of text" when opening downloaded files
Version: 1.0.9

BUILD.md, after:

# Building Standalone Executables

This guide explains how to build standalone executables of Witchy CLI that don't require Node.js to be installed.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ installed (for building only, not for running the executable)
- All dependencies installed (`npm install`)

## Pre-populated Database

Starting with v1.0.6, Witchy CLI includes a pre-populated database with the executable. Before building:

```bash
# Generate the pre-populated database
npm run db:prepopulate

# Verify the database
npm run db:verify
```

This creates `assets/witchy.db` which is bundled with the executable.

## Building for Your Platform

To build an executable for your current platform:

```bash
npm run build
```

This creates an executable in the `dist/` folder:

- **Windows**: `dist/witchy-cli.exe`
- **macOS**: `dist/witchy-cli`
- **Linux**: `dist/witchy-cli`

## Building for All Platforms

To build executables for Windows, macOS, and Linux at once:

```bash
npm run build:all
```

This creates:

- `dist/witchy-cli-win.exe` - Windows executable
- `dist/witchy-cli-macos` - macOS executable
- `dist/witchy-cli-linux` - Linux executable

## Running the Executable

Once built, users can run the executable without Node.js:

**Windows:**

```cmd
witchy-cli.exe herb rosemary
```

**macOS/Linux:**

```bash
chmod +x witchy-cli  # Make executable (first time only)
./witchy-cli herb rosemary
```

## File Size

The executables are approximately 40-50MB each because they include:

- Node.js runtime
- All dependencies (sqlite3, etc.)
- All source code and data files

## Distribution

### Method 1: GitHub Releases (Automated)

When you push a version tag, GitHub Actions automatically builds and publishes executables:

```bash
git tag v1.0.0
git push origin v1.0.0
```

Users can then download from the [Releases page](https://github.com/the-amber-joy/witchy-cli/releases).

### Method 2: Manual Distribution

Simply share the built executable file. Users can:

1. Download the file
2. Run it directly (no installation needed)

## Troubleshooting

### "Cannot find module" errors

Make sure all required files are in the `pkg.assets` section of `package.json`.

### Database issues

The executable includes a pre-populated database. On first run, this database is copied to the user's data directory:

- Windows: `%APPDATA%\WitchyCLI\witchy.db`
- macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/WitchyCLI/witchy.db`
- Linux: `~/.local/share/witchy-cli/witchy.db`

If searches aren't working, check if the database was copied correctly.

### macOS "unverified developer" warning

Users may need to right-click → Open the first time, or run:

```bash
xattr -cr witchy-cli
```

### macOS Users Seeing Garbled Text

If macOS users report seeing "garbled text" when opening the file, they're trying to open the binary executable in a text editor instead of running it from Terminal.

**Solution:**

- Direct them to [MACOS_INSTALL.md](MACOS_INSTALL.md) for proper installation instructions
- Or have them download the DMG installer instead (see below)

### Creating macOS DMG Installer

To create a more user-friendly DMG installer for macOS:

```bash
# First build the binary
npm run build

# Then create the DMG (macOS only)
npm run build:macos:dmg
```

This creates `dist/Witchy-CLI-x.x.x-macos.dmg` which includes:

- The `witchy` binary
- An `install.sh` script for easy installation
- Instructions file

The DMG creation is automatically done by GitHub Actions when pushing a version tag.

### Linux permissions

Make the file executable:

```bash
chmod +x witchy-cli
```

## Technical Details

We use [pkg](https://github.com/vercel/pkg) to bundle Node.js and the application into a single executable. The `pkg` configuration in `package.json` specifies:

- Target platforms and Node.js version
- Assets to include (JSON data, source files)
- Scripts to bundle

The executable includes everything needed to run, making distribution simple for end users.
